# DSCI-303-Project
The Harris County criminal system is rife with disparities. Despite making up just 19% of the population, black people comprised 45% of bookings in Harris County jail from 2015-2018 [1]. Nationally, this is in line with disparities in criminal justice outcomes, which tends to favor white, affluent defendants over people of color and lower-income defendants [2]. This paper aims to employ machine learning techniques to investigate what demographic outcomes are predictive of harsher sentencing in Harris County. We leverage a robust publicly available dataset from the Harris County Clerk’s Office with over 200,000 Harris County Court case outcomes to create multivariate regression models. First, we estimate sentencing harshness based solely on the facts of the case, then we estimate the effect of defendant demographics on sentencing outcomes. Including defendant demographics in our model does not improve model performance, suggesting more work to be done for machines to accurately estimate disparities. 

Using publicly available data from the Harris County Clerk’s website, we examine criminal cases in Harris County over a period of ten years from 2010 - 2019. We choose this period because it provides a large set of observations prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, which temporarily altered the criminal justice system in Harris County. We restrict our analysis to the Harris County District Courts which adjudicate felonies. due to greater variability in sentencing for felonies (ranging from 180 days to life in prison).

The data is available at the following link: https://www.hcdistrictclerk.com/Common/e-services/PublicDatasets.aspx
We use the "Weekly_Historical_Criminal" dataset, located at the bottom of the group of datasets labeled "Criminal." The data updates weekly and as such is named in the following format: "Weekly_Historical_Criminal_YYYYMMDD.zip"	where "YYYYMMDD" corresponds to the Year (YYYY), Month (MM), and Day (MM) the data was last updated (typically updates on Sundays). The data is preprocessed in our code, but if desired a codebook is available at the Harris County Clerk's Office website (link above) under the name: "Crim Rec Layout-Data Dict.xlsx"
